Docs: Improved introduction to i18n for Cog authors and Translators (#6351)
Cog-Creators/Red-DiscordBot: docs/framework_i18n.rst

Internationalization Framework
==============================

--------
Tutorial
--------

> The Red framework supports translations into different languages, making it easy 
> for translators to contribute new language files to the Red project, and to Cogs
> that use the framework. The framework is based on the popular gettext format, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Red supports an internationalization framework designed to allow users to
translate user-facing strings to a contextually defined language. This
framework is available for Cog Creators to use to define translations for the
strings in their cogs. The framework is based on the popular gettext format, 
```
Just calling it "The red framework" in the first line is using an adjective without its noun. Splitting this sentence in two allows it to be explained in a bit more depth, while avoiding a run on.

(with some modifications), which is the standard for providing translations in 
lots of different software projects.

> * ``.pot`` files are typically generated by the original author of the cog, and 

Reviewer: This section jumps into listing the structure of the files used for translations without any setup. I'm not sure if this needs to be moved, or if it just needs a sentence leading into the content about to be presented.

> * ``.pot`` files are typically generated by the original author of the cog, and 
>   contain the basic messages in en_US (the language Red is written in), and is 
>   used as a template for translators to build their translations on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``.pot`` files are typically generated by the original author of the cog, and 
  contain the basic messages in en_US (the language Red is written in). This 
  file is used as a template for translators to build their translations on.
```
Less long winded as two sentences.

* ``.po`` files (portable objects) are language specific, for example 
  ``en-GB.po`` for British English, or ``en-ES.po`` for Spanish. Note that Red 
  uses a ``-`` character in the filename, not a ``_`` which is often seen as as 

>   the standard.

Reviewer: Somewhere, possibly here, you should link to <https://translate.discord.red/>. That site is where translators can contribute to Red's core translations, and lists all of the languages Red supports.

* ``locales/`` directory, where ``.po`` files are stored.

> So, if your are the author of a Cog, or you are adding translations for the first

Reviewer: This sentence is too unsure to be here. At the highest level, translating is a 3 step process:
1. Update the code to reference strings in the proper way that they will be translated, and can be detected as needing translations by `redgettext`
2. Use `redgettext` to generate a `messages.pot` file (must be re-done if strings are changed/added)
3. Clone the latest `messages.pot` file into a `lang-code.po` file, and fill out the `msgstr`s for each string with the appropriate translation for that language/string.

At this point in the guide, we only know vaguely what a `.pot` and `.po` file are. We should not already be telling the CC they need to generate a `.pot` file before they have actually updated the code to support translations. We also should not be implying to translators that they can translate a cog simply by generating a `.pot` file without touching its code.

Realistically there should probably be 3 sections for each of these 3 steps, rather than `For cog creators` and `For translators` sections.

> time to python code, you would probably generate ``.pot`` file to make your code 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
time to python code, you would probably generate ``.pot`` files to make your code 
```

easily translatable. See below for instructions.

If you are trying to translate part of Red, or a Cog, you would write a ``.po`` 
file.

A technical detail, is that Red actually uses a slightly modified version of 
``pygettext``, called ``redgettext`` (https://github.com/Cog-Creators/redgettext). 
This is mostly just an implementation detail though and does not affect Cog 

> authors or translators. If you are used to gettext, it is important to explain 

Reviewer 3: It does affect Cog authors in that our tool can extract command docstrings (which *are* part of cog's UI) while not extracting all the other docstrings (which generally aren't user-facing). This is what the `redgettext` usage example listed in this document does and is something that cannot be done with `pygettext` (which can only do no docstrings or all docstrings). The distinction probably isn't important for translators who just translate whatever `.pot` file is given to them but is definitely something that Cog authors would want to know.

More so, `pygettext` will sometime in the future supports more features than `pygettext` which is actually rather limited - it has no support for plurals *or* for context-dependent translations. Those features are already implemented in `redgettext` (see Cog-Creators/redgettext#9, Cog-Creators/redgettext#10, Cog-Creators/redgettext#11) and just haven't been released yet as I was hoping to have a working implementation of relevant runtime features in Red as well to make sure it aligns with what the support was implemented for.

While upstreaming those features to pygettext *was* mentioned as a possibility (https://discuss.python.org/t/modernize-and-add-missing-features-to-pygettext/26455), a year passed since so it's unclear that there's enough interest to get it there any time soon.

that Red does *not use `.mo` files* - it is not necessary to run ``msgfmt`` or 

> other tools, it reads the ``.po`` files directly.

Reviewer: I don't think this paragraph is needed, instead you can introduce `redgettext` when explaining how to generate `.pot` files as a helper provided to make generating them from a cog easier.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For Cog authors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For authors of Cogs, it's very easy to make your bot translatable using the
Translator class provided - code samples can be found below. In summary, the 

> steps are;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
steps are:
```

> * Import the i18n Translator class and cog_i18n decorator.
> * Decorate your class with @cog_i18n
> * Translate literal strings (eg "This is a test command") to use the underscore 
>   function like _("This a test command")
> * Use redgettext to generate a message.pot file
> * Write a test ``.po`` file, and put it in your ``locales/`` directory relative
>   to your ``.py`` code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Import the i18n `Translator` class and ``cog_i18n`` decorator.
* Instantiate an instance of `Translator` under the ``_`` variable.
* Decorate your class with `@cog_i18n(_) <cog_i18n>`.
* Wrap string literals with a function call using your `Translator` object. Example:  ``_("This a test command")``.
```

            """command description"""
            await ctx.send(_("This is a test command"))

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note
  If you need to interpolate values into parts of the string, you will need to use `str.format` **outside** of the function call.
  Example:
  .. code-block:: python
    await ctx.send(_("Nice to meet you, {user}").format(user=ctx.author))
  
.. warning
  You **cannot** use f-strings with translations. f-strings resolve before translations are able to run,
  preventing the translation logic from matching the string with its translation.
```

> 

Reviewer: At this point is when I think it needs a new section header for using `redgettext`.

> After making your Cog, and using the _() function to make your strings 
> translatable, you will need to generate a :code:`messages.pot` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After updating your cog to make your strings translatable, you will need to
generate a :code:`messages.pot` file to be able to apply translations to your
strings.
```

We recommend using redgettext - a modified version of pygettext for Red.
You can install redgettext by running :code:`pip install redgettext` in a 
command prompt.

To generate the :code:`messages.pot` file, you will now need to run
:code:`python -m redgettext -c [path_to_cog]`
This file will contain all strings to be translated, including
docstrings.
(For advanced usage check :code:`python -m redgettext -h`)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For Translators

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: I don't love this header name, but I can't think of a better one. "Writing translations" doesn't seem specific enough, but anything else I think of is too wordy.

If your Cog is already made to be translatable by the original Cog author, you

> simply need to write a ``.po`` file for your language.

Reviewer: Rather than saying they need to create a `.po` file for their language, it should probably be explained that either an existing `.po` file should be edited or the `.pot` file can be cloned & renamed with the proper language code to be used as a base. If there is no `.pot` file, the translator will need to ask the CC to add translation support to their cog.

> You can use a simple text editor to write a ``.po`` file, but you also use popular

Reviewer: I would suggest adding a small code block example of what a `.po` file looks like, and how to edit it. Additionally, there should be a `..warning` that anything within curly braces must be left as-is for the code to function correctly, as those are places where a value is inserted into the string.
```
#: redbot/core/_cog_manager.py:464
msgid "The following paths were removed: {paths}"
msgstr "Les chemins suivants ont été enlevés : {paths}"
```

Reviewer 3: I *would* suggest just linking to https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/PO-Files.html *but* we actually don't support the majority of that spec *yet* (the missing features are implemented for redgettext but Red itself lacks support for those constructs) so maybe we will have to wait for that...

tools like `poedit
<https://poedit.net/>`_ to translate the strings in the messages.pot file. There 
are also free online websites that can be used to get you started, like 

> https://crowdin.com/ which some developers link to their code repositories, or 

Reviewer: As mentioned before, Red core (and some third party cogs) do expect users to exclusively use crowdin, rather than PRing in changes directly to `.po` files. It might make sense to mention that here, or in the next paragraph.

https://www.potranslate.com/upload where you can just upload the ``.pot`` file.

Once you have written your ``.po`` file, you will need to send it back to the Cog 
author. Most Cog authors would prefer pull requests on GitHub, but it's probably

> best to open an issue with the original Cog author to discuss how they would 
> like to receive your ``.po`` file language contribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
best to reach out to the Cog author to discuss how they would prefer to receive
your translation contribution.
```
